A new breakthrough in Computer-Aided Diagnosis



One of the emerging field in computer science and medicine is computer-aided diagnosis (CAD). Imaging techniques in X-ray, MRI, and ultrasound diagnostics yield a great deal of information that the radiologist or other medical professional has to analyze and evaluate comprehensively in a short time. CAD systems process digital images for typical appearances and to highlight conspicuous sections, such as possible diseases, in order to offer input to support a decision taken by the professional.
There are two types of kidney cancer that have very similar histopathological characteristics, one is malignant, i.e. Chromophobe tumors and the other one is benign, i.e. Oncocytoma tumors. Nevertheless, on histopathological images they look very similar to each other and thus it is very hard for human experts, i.e. pathologists, to recognizes the differences between Chromophobe Renal Cell Carcinoma from Renal Oncocytoma. Therefore, their identification are prune to human errors.
To mitigate these types of errors CAD systems can be very helpful. CAD can not only help doctors to accurately distinguish pathology, but also greatly improve the recognition efficiency and relieve eye fatigue. One common approach is to make a large dataset of labeled images and train a deep learning model on them. However, black box algorithms, including deep learning models, have the problem for gaining a trust of medical experts about their interpretation.
Therefore, there is a need for explainable AI system that can distinguish differences among two types of cancerous tumor.  With the assistant of pathological expert Prof. Mohammad Haeri from University of XXXXXX, we defined a set of rules and feed them into the rule based classification algorithm that can accurately distinguish between these two types of tumors. Our algorithm share its interpretation with the physicians and the reason of its interpretation in detail as a report. The program will generate a report with detailed data that is easier to understand and more evidence-based than black-box algorithms. Therefore, its explain ability can get the trust of human experts to diagnose these tumors.

For example, compared to Oncocytoma tumors, Chromophobe tumors have more prominent cell membrane and perinuclear halo. By adding these features to AI image recognition, we were able to distinguish between the two types of tumors.
Due to Covid-19 outbreak we do all of our meeting remotely, and never visit the team member outside the Zoom. On the other hand, we have a productive progress and our progress is an evidence that not necessarily in person meeting is useful. By saving a lot of commuting time, we can focus more on our work. At the same time, instant online communication greatly reduces feedback time and improves work efficiency. This outbreak provides an experimental opportunity to test this novel approach to work.

